offers ways of reading non/fictional narratives which are coming to figure 
increasingly in students' programmes as the nature of literary studies itself 
changes. In Chapter 3 I explore ways of reading a nineteenth/century 
autobiography, Samuel Bamford's Early Days, and a nineteenth/century 
biography, Elizabeth Gaskell's The Life of Charlotte Bronte. In selecting these 
narratives, I hope to show how, first, Bamford's autobiography can help 
readers to think about the relationship between writing and class (Bamford 
is generally recognised as a contributor to a tradition of working/class male 
writing). And, secondly, in the case of Elizabeth Gaskell's biography of 
Charlotte Bronte, my aim will be to show how this work can be used in 
discussions of women's writing. 

Of course, judgements are involved in making selections, and selections 
had to be made on the assumption that the average reader's principal study 
needs are still likely to be orientated towards the novel (which as a result 
remains the principal focus of the book). Consequently I should not like 
readers to assume that my readings of non/fictional prose narratives amount 
to a universal code for reading all autobiographies and biographies, different 
examples of which can be found from periods and contexts which, for 
reasons of space, I have not been able to tackle. My readings of non/fiction 
prose narratives offer broad principles to guide reading, backed up by 
examples, and are designed to act as starting points for further study. Of 
course, the same can be said for my readings of novels. Notes which follow 
the chapters point to sources for this further study, and additional infor/ 
mation is provided in the annotated select bibliography. Where material is 
available in easily accessible anthologies and readers I have endeavoured to 
cite from these (whilst seeking also to refer to the original source). 

One of the aims of this book is to provide students with a framework for 
thinking about the relationships between novels and other forms of prose 
narrative, in historical and cultural context, in the light of recent develop/ 
ments in literary studies. In addition, the book provides a basic introduction 
to recent critical positions which have had a major impact on the study 
of the novel, such as feminism, postmodernism and postcolonialism. It is 
important that a book such as this be a synthesis of established positions, 
and, within the bounds of accessibility, as up to date as it can be. As a conse/ 
quence, it has been necessary to venture into some, at times, quite chal/ 
lenging conceptual territory. This is particularly the case in the second 
half of Chapter 1, where I elaborate a critical vocabulary that has emerged 
from the movements known as structuralism and poststructuralism, New 

Historicism and cultural materialism; and in the second half of Chapter 2, 
where I consider debates about the origins of the novel which have been 
conditioned by these movements. 

In the light of this, a word about how to read this book: if during the more 
abstract discussions the reader should happen to find the going tough, move 
on to the more detailed case/study readings in individual chapters, which 
I generally cite after making a conceptual point, and which amount to 
illustrations of the general conceptual point I am making. It could be 
helpful to move around the book, taking advantage of the sections and the 
cross/referencing. Then reread the challenging section. Feel free to make 
choices: if the reader's immediate need is to find out how narrative in the 
novel works in principle and detail, turn to the beginning of Chapter 2 
(where I use Emma as an exemplary novel narrative). 

Literary study without concepts is not an option. Wherever possible I 
have provided definitions of more specialised concepts, such as point of 
view, rhetoric, discourse, intertextuality, the implied reader, and free indirect 
speech, to name but a few. However, it is worth stressing that definitions in 
themselves are of limited use: my definitions are always located in the context 
of an interlocking argument, and this is as important as the definitions. 

This book is an introduction to the novel and prose narrative as elements of 
literature. 'Literature' is a complex term. It can be used to describe a range 
of linguistic techniques and strategies which generate, for instance, a 
resonant image, or a sense of irony, or purposeful ambiguity, the effects of 
which would lead us to describe the writing which embodied it as 'literary'. 
'Literature' is most often used to signify a valued tradition of writings, 
which is implicitly how it functions when we speak of 'English literature'. 
When I use the term in this work, I by no means reject that meaning: many 
of the works I use to illustrate this study are major contributions to English 
literature which have their status confirmed in the regularity with which 
they are taught in schools, colleges and universities. However, this implies 
that 'English literature' is inseparable from processes of selection, which are 
embedded in structures of power and prestige. So I shall also take note of 
this position, and, consequently, argue against a view of 'literature' which 
assumes that it is a knowable and immutable thing for all times and all 
people. Consequently, novels and prose narratives will have more than one 
relation to different meanings of 'literature'. 

Reading the novel, and to a lesser extent the short story, in their relations 
to different meanings of 'literature' will be my principal focus. But I shall 
also explore the novel in relation to the biography and the autobiography: 
prose narratives which are classified as non/fictional, factual and often 'non/ 
literary', and, yet, which can invite complex responses from readers. If the 
boundaries of 'literature' are, from an historical point of view, never quite 
settled, then 'non/literature' becomes a category which we cannot ignore. 
We will need a rather different kind of critical approach to draw out the full 

consequences of this point, which will be the overall aim of this intro' 
ductory chapter. To begin with, we should address the problem of prose 
which is, on the face of it, language which is rather less than 'literary'. 

The Oxford English Dictionary (OED) defines prose as 'straightforward 
discourse' or 'the ordinary form of written or spoken language'. The 
ordinariness of prose makes it different from poetic language, which, at its 
most characteristic, is recognisable from the presence of rhyme or metre. 
This ordinariness is a strength from the perspective of communicative 
efficiency and flexibility. Prose is the medium I am writing in now, and it 
could equally be used to introduce readers to the use of computer software: 
'This introductory section of the Microsoft Windows User's Guide provides a 
guide to the documentation — so you know where to find information about 
working with Windows." But this rather militates against the literary 
credentials of prose, a point recognised by the journalist Andrew Marr 
when reviewing The New Oxford Book of English Prose (1998): 'prose is such 
a general commodity that a real anthology of English prose is unthinkable. 
It would spread too widely, from computer manuals to Sun editorials, and 
would be unreadable.' 2 Marr's comment raises two questions that will 
concern us. The first relates to his sense of prose as a 'general commodity': if 
prose is so ubiquitous, why are certain forms of prose adjudged distinctive? 
The second question raised by Marr is that of readability: if an anthology of 
the totality of English prose would be so inclusive as to be unthinkable, what 
is it that makes some forms of prose more pleasurably readable and thus 
selectable than the variety found in computer manuals? One answer to that 
question must be: narrative. 

In fact, the majority of anthologised pieces in The New Oxford Book of 
English Prose are from either novels or short stories, forms cast in narrative. In 
1752, the poet and critic Samuel Johnson reflected on why narrative is so 
captivating: 

No Stile of Conversation is more extensively acceptable than the Narrative. 
He who has stored his Memory with slight Anecdotes, private Incidents, and 
personal Particularities, seldom fails to find his Audience favourable. Almost 

every Man listens with Eagerness to contemporary History; perhaps almost every 
Man has some real or imaginary Connection with a celebrated Character, some 
desire to advance, or oppose a rising Name . . . He that is a Hearer in one Place, 
qualifies himself to become a Speaker in another; for though he cannot compre/ 
hend a Series of Argument, or transport the volatile Spirit of Wit without 
Evaporation, yet he thinks himself able to treasure up the various Incidents of a 
Story, and pleases his Hopes with the Information which he shall give to some 
inferior Society. 1 

Skilfully told stories give pleasure to their listeners. As Johnson indicates, 
narrative consists of 'Incidents' or events arranged into a story. These events 
are related by a 'Speaker', or narrator, and they are addressed to a 'Hearer'. 
The popular and non/specialised nature of narrative is evident from the way 
in which 'Hearers' can themselves become 'Speakers' or narrators in turn. 
We will all, at some points in our conversational lives, be narrators in ways 
that will not lead us all to be poets. Johnson reflects on the ordinary, everyday 
status of narrative as a conversational genre — a genre is a regular (conven/ 
tional) way of speaking or writing — which highlights similarities between 
this mode of communication and prose. 

This book will explore the workings of written prose narratives which 
relate 'History' in the form of 'private Incidents' acted out in the 'personal 
Peculiarities' of 'Characters' either 'real or imaginary'. For whilst Johnson 
is reflecting on oral narrative, his terms account for the defining charac 
teristics of written narrative genres such as biography and autobiography 
which narrate the lives of 'real' individuals. They also account for the 
'imaginary' representation of characters and their histories in the novel, a 
narrative form which was rising to prominence in England when Johnson 
was writing in the mid eighteenth century (see sections 2.11—14). 

It would be wrong to infer from this that all narrative is popular, conver/ 
sational and prosaic: epic poetry of grand subject matter and sophisticated 
diction such as John Milton's Paradise Lost is woven in the 'volatile Spirit of 
Wit', but is still a narrative. At the same time, narrative does not require 
Milton's epic grandeur to endow it with artistic status. By the end of the 
nineteenth century certain English novels had come to use prose in remark/ 
ably sophisticated — indeed poetic — ways which made the ordinary and 
prosaic the basis for distinctive literary art, a theme which will be pursued 
particularly in Chapter 4. The general argument of this book is that it is 
important to see such developments in cultural and historical contexts: in 
sections 4.4—5 I explore the narrative sophistication of Henry James's fiction 

in relation to popular narrative forms such as the late nineteenth/century 
newspaper story. Having said this, we need to acknowledge that placing 
novels and prose narratives in social and historical contexts requires con/ 
siderations which respect the specific characteristics of narrative. 

Narrative is generally classified as a mimetic medium. 'Mimesis' is a term 
used to describe literary modes which aim to 'imitate' human thoughts, 
speech, action and the world in which they take place: drama and narrative 
would be more readily recognised as mimetic than would lyric poetry. Given 
the mimetic impulses of narrative, and Johnson's recognition of the way in 
which narrative presents us with 'History', it is understandable that students 
expect to study novels and short stories in ways which accentuate their 
relation to the worldly situations which they dramatise. For instance, readers 
may turn to Charlotte Bronte's Jane Eyre to experience the lot of an orphan 
and governess in the Victorian period. It would appear that such novels 
reflect their historical contexts almost transparently. 

However, approaches to the novel and its contexts which assume that a 
narrative imitates or simply reflects the times in which it was made encounter 
obvious difficulties when confronted by certain narrative strategies. These 
challenging, self-conscious narrative strategies are explored in Chapter 5 
through Laurence Sterne's Tristram Shandy (an eighteenth/century novel), 
John Fowles's The French Lieutenant's Woman, Paul Auster's City of Glass, 
and Salman Rushdie's Midnight's Children (twentieth/century novels). These 
narratives playfully expose the limits of mimesis. Although I shall argue that 
even playful, sceptical narrative strategies lead the reader back to worldly 
insights into societies and histories — in the case of Midnight's Children to 
colonial domination and its resistance — it will be important to demonstrate 
how these contexts have to be traced through narrative as a complex medium. 
This remains the case even when narratives appear to be transparently 
mimetic. 

If we adopt a basic distinction between the form and content of narrative 
— roughly, content is what a narrative says or is about, form is how it says it — 
then poetics is a formal mode of literary study based on the systematic 
identification and analysis of the devices and patterns which deliver the 
'how' of a narrative. Poetics is the essential starting point for analysing how 
narratives mediate their effects — even when that mediation amounts to a

disavowal of narrative's capacity to reflect the world transparently. Sections 
2.1—5 are a reading of Jane Austen's Emma which uses poetics to explain its 
narrative strategies by accounting for the elements of narrative in general, 
such as events, point of view, and character. This will help to explain why 
Emma is viewed as 'literary'. 

But this raises another question: how do we trace social and cultural 
contexts in 'literary' strategies which did not come into the world ready/ 
made, but which were themselves shaped by processes of historical and 
cultural change? These questions will lead us into a debate about the origins 
of the novel as a distinctive literary form developing in conjunction with 
specific social and cultural circumstances in eighteenth/century England. 
This is a literary/critical debate that has been in progress since the 1950s, 
and continues in the present. Sections 2.7—10 will answer these questions 
through a reading of Samuel Richardson's early novel Pamela which will be 
framed by the questions: what do we mean by a novel? Which genres and 
writing techniques were drawn together to produce it? As we shall see, 
Pamela is based on the familiar letter and the journal. A cultural and critical 
debate about literacy and the making of the self in the mid eighteenth 
century will be traced through the distinctive way in which Richardson's 
Pamela transforms these genres into a special kind of narrative. 

This brings us to the importance of literary/critical argument. Writers of 
novels often wrote critically and reflectively about the narrative strategies they 
were shaping, a point that will be demonstrated in connection with Samuel 
Richardson and Henry Fielding in section 2.10; George Eliot in 3.12; and 
Henry James, H. G. Wells and Virginia Woolf in 4.7 and 4.14. Moreover, 
since the nineteenth century, novels have been reviewed and judged in 
literary periodicals (sections 3.4 and 3.7 will explore examples of these). 
These practices link the novel to the academic literary criticism which has 
been practised on the form for around one hundred years: it demonstrates 
that the nature of narrative was actively debated and analysed in its own 
time. 

Whilst there are continuities between the critical writings of practising 
novelists of the past and more recent forms of literary criticism, it is also 
necessary to be alert to differences. The main difference is that, since the end 

of the nineteenth century, the novel has become a major object of academic 
study in schools and higher education, viewed as an embodiment of literary 
and artistic tradition. This was not necessarily the function it was 'born' 
to, or a reliable index of the esteem in which it has sometimes been held, as 
this chapter will later suggest. Nonetheless, in becoming a major object of 
literary and artistic tradition, increasingly sophisticated varieties of literary 
criticism have been developed to validate this view of the novel. 

Literary criticism is a powerful shaping force in the study of literature, 
which has played, and continues to play, a central role in selecting what we 
read and how we read it. The initial forms of academic novel criticism to be 
formulated in the later nineteenth century were orientated towards historical 
study, in line with the general way in which English literature — a university 
discipline that barely existed before the end of the nineteenth century — was 
studied at that time. This approach emphasised the relationship between 
philology (the history of the language), the history of genre, and authorial 
genius in shaping a national literary tradition. Subsequently, the dominant 
modes of twentieth/century novel criticism have taken poetics as their 
orientation, emphasising the formal complexity of the novel (formalist 
approaches will be differentiated and discussed in more detail in sections 
2.1-5). 

Formalist approaches have generated rich insights, but also some draw/ 
backs. In making distinctions between literary and non/literary narrative 
strategies — by, for instance, foregrounding the complexity of point of view 
in the novel — formal approaches have commented richly on a selection of 
important novels whilst remaining relatively silent on non/fictional prose 
narratives such as biography and autobiography. Consequently these formal 
approaches to the novel have offered only limited insight into the wider 
literary and cultural significance of prose narrative. 

Biography and autobiography are complex narratives which can in/ 
vite readers to think again about what we mean by 'literature'. Victorian 
examples of these prose narratives are a major focus of sections 3.8—11, 
where I offer ways of reading Elizabeth Gaskell's The Life of Charlotte 
Bronte, and the working/class autodidact Samuel Bamford's autobiographi/ 
cal Early Days. My approach to narrative is framed by a style of new literary/ 
historical reading which looks for literariness in the supposedly non/literary, 
and the non/literary in literature. Such an approach can be aligned with 
such movements as poststructuralism, the New Historicism, and cultural 
materialism (as well as their feminist and postcolonial inflections): move/ 

merits which have developed out of recent theoretical approaches to literary 
study/ The remainder of this chapter will provide a basic outline of the 
conceptual vocabulary which supports a new literary/historical approach, 
along with a discussion of its significance. The concepts of rhetoric, 
intertextuality, discourse and culture can provide readers with new ways of 
making literary/critical connections between novels and non/fictional 
narrative forms. At a deeper level they provide us with new ways of re 
thinking the historically shifting relations between literary and non/literary 
writings as practices which are embedded in cultural and social relations. 

Of course, new literary/historical approaches are not entirely new: one of 
the striking things about the conceptual vocabulary that will play a role in 
the more integrated approach to the novel and prose narrative I advocate is 
that an earlier version of it can be found at work in the 'old' historicism, 
which organised literary criticism prior to the ascendancy of formalism. We 
can observe this by returning to one of the first textbooks designed to 
introduce students to the study of the novel, in order to measure the simi/ 
larities and differences between 'old' and 'new' historicisms. 

Selden L. Whitcomb's The Study of a Novel, published in 1906 when the 
author was an associate professor of English literature at the University of 
Kansas, addressed the first generation of students to study the novel as an 
academic exercise. Whitcomb's approach was historicist in the sense that he 
saw the development of the novel running parallel to and reflecting the grand 
historical progress of civilisation: 'Every great movement in the history of 
fiction, though modified by race and nationality, is one phase of a general 
cultural episode in modern civilisation." Whitcomb clearly understood 
'modernity' to be a process of change and transformation, and his evidence 
for the novel's links to this progressive movement were to be found in such 
grand constructs as civilisation, the race, the nation and culture. 'Culture', 
as Raymond Williams has pointed out, is a complex word with a wide sem/ 
antic range, and we will encounter its different past and present meanings in 
what remains of this chapter. 6 

To begin with, Whitcomb supposes that the progress of civilisation is 
reflected in novels which, when taken together, constitute a major 'cultural 
episode' in that process. This was because the novel, for Whitcomb, reflected 

'cultural life in general'. For Whitcomb, 'culture' shaped the specificities of 
race and nation, and the mimetic capabilities of the novel 'give one a more 
extensive picture of social culture than any other form of art' (p. 138). In 
making this claim he brought 'culture' and 'society' together in a way which 
was characteristic of nineteenth/century thought. Societies were conceived 
as historically developing organisms, made up of varied yet interdependent 
social classes and groupings. What distinguished these societies from one 
another was the distinctive pattern of 'culture' by which such societies lived, 
the term here embracing knowledge, belief, law, morals and customs. In this 
sense 'culture' was conceived anthropologically as a whole way of life 
(the impact of this conception of culture on George Eliot's novels will be 
examined in section 3.12). Not only could the novel reflect culture, it was 
formed from the expressive essence of culture: Whitcomb noted that the 
novel's 'medium of expression, language ... must always suggest some 
special type of cultural life' (p. 138). This was to be found in a detailed study 
of the novel, and his textbook opened with a close analysis of its distinctive 
narrative structures (events, episodes, story, plot, character, point of view) 
and their artistic effects. To this extent, Whitcomb's cultural historicism 
depended on formal analysis. Yet, he approached the question of form from 
a specific perspective. 

Whitcomb wrote from the perspective of an American university system 
which placed a strong emphasis on 'comparative rhetoric' and composition 
(p. 218). Rhetoric is a discipline with ancient roots, concerned with 
analysing the construction of oral and written compositions in order to 
maximise their persuasive and affective powers on their intended addressees. 
Clearly rhetoric has a practical aim to advise writers on good, and not so 
good, ways of writing. Whitcomb's book regularly suggests compositional 
exercises which will assist in clarifying the rhetorical effects of particular 
modes of writing: Assuming that Silas Marner [in George Eliot's novel of 
1860] was a real individual, recast the novel into the form of a biography' 
(p. 225). This is something that I put into practice, albeit on a less ambitious 
scale, when I rewrite passages of narrative in sections 2.2 and 4.12 to assess 
the workings of the originals. In section 3.10 I focus specifically on 
biography as a distinctively rhetorical form of writing. 

The approach I adopt towards biography urges an appreciation of rhetoric 
as a significant critical tool with much broader implications. Formalist novel 
criticism in the twentieth century has, with some exceptions, 7 tended to 
neglect the role of rhetoric. But in the last decades of the twentieth century  

critics have rediscovered rhetoric, because it enables critical and analytical 
insight into the social and historical contexts within which particular forms 
of narrative have aspired to be persuasive and powerful. There are two 
consequences which follow from this: first, rhetoric encourages readers 
of narrative to widen their horizons beyond the novel, and to look at the 
workings of the novel in relation to other kinds of narrative (and non/ 
narrative) material — I'll explore this in the following sections. Secondly, if 
we remember that rhetoric has a persuasive aim, then a rhetorical approach 
to narratives can highlight the way in which narratives have entered into 
contests to secure the attention of readers, or tell the truth from particular 
perspectives. Rhetoric can be seen as an index of the struggles that divide, 
fracture and fragment the historical process along the lines of gender, class 
and race. I'll explore these in more detail in the following sections: they will 
lead us to an accordingly modified understanding of 'culture'. 

A defining feature of the novel is that it does not belong to any single genre, 
yet participates in all genres. Whitcomb's rhetorical approach to the novel 
acknowledges its borrowings from the conventions which distinguish other 
literary modes and prose genres. For instance, Whitcomb suggests that 
'students of the novel might profit by plot analysis of [Thomas] Carlyle's 
French Revolution', a colourful and dramatic work of history published in 
1837 (p. 48). Thus Whitcomb saw the novel as a 'complex, composite ... 
type' (p. 218) which was made up from 'literature itself. 

By 'literature' Whitcomb meant a vast field in which writings and generic 
conventions circulated. It included drama, which provided conventions for 
representing the speech, thought and action of characters. It also included 
the prose genres of the narrative history (such as Carlyle's French Revolution), 
which provided models for plotting the passage of time and processes of 
social change and continuity. The prose genre of documentary reportage 
provided models for writing about the observation of social life and manners 
on which the 'realistic' effects of novels often depend (different critical 
accounts of 'realism' will be traced in sections 2.12 and 3.12). The bio/ 
graphy provided models for narrating the life/course of individual characters. 
Finally the essay provided models for narrative commentary and discussion 
(p. 171). 

Whitcomb's approach to the derivativeness of the novel anticipates 
present/day approaches to what have come to be known as the 'inter/ 
textualities' of narrative. These approaches are premised on understanding 
narrative as 'text', that is to say a tissue of interwoven writings. Thus 
'intertextuality' is a concept which seeks to grasp the fact that a novel 'is not 
a self-contained, individually authored whole, but the absorption and 
transformation of other texts'. 8 The intertextualities of the novel and prose 
narrative will be a consistent focus of my approach, especially in Chapter 2, 
where I consider the eighteenth/century origins of the novel; Chapter 3, 
which considers the relation of the Victorian novel to contemporary bio/ 
graphical and autobiographical narratives; and Chapter 5, which explores 
the complex intertextualities of late twentieth/century postmodern and post/ 
colonial fictions (the absorption and transformation of Laurence Sterne's 
parodic eighteenth/century novel Tristram Shandy in Salman Rushdie's 
Midnight's Children in particular). In thinking about the significance of 
intertextuality, it is necessary to make links with the concept of discourse, 
and broader trends in present/day literary theory. 

Whitcomb's approach addressed the different 'forms of discourse' that are 
woven together in the novel (p. 218). 'Discourse' is a term which links 
Whitcomb's book to present/day theoretical concerns, though in consider/ 
ing these we shall need to trace some shifts in its meaning. 'Discourse' derives 
from the Latin discursus, which means to run to and fro: the OED tells us 
that some of the earliest sixteenth/century usages in English employ the term 
to describe, for example, the movements of the sun during its daily course 
across the sky. At around about the same time, 'discourse' was also being 
used to classify any spoken or written treatment of a subject. For Whitcomb 
'discourse' describes an approach to the analysis of a novel's composite 
textual structure as it goes to and fro between a variety of genres, their 
linguistic conventions and implied social contexts. Late twentieth/century 
theoretical approaches to novel and narrative criticism continue to invoke 
'discourse' in this sense. At the same time they have gone further in using the 
term to probe the linguistic, social and power relations that are embedded in 
a narrative's absorption of 'discourses'. 

It is beyond the scope of this book to provide a detailed introduction to the 
terrain of literary theory which has transformed literary study in Britain

since the mid 1970s. 9 It is possible to outline a general sense of the way in 
which it has transformed an understanding of the orientation of language in 
general, which has, in turn, had major implications for the language of the 
novel and prose narrative. The initial impetus for the turn to theory derived 
from Ferdinand de Saussure's early twentieth/century linguistics and its 
adoption by the continental European structuralist and semiotic movement 
of the 1950s and 1960s ('semiotics' is the study of signs). 

What did Saussure and structuralism challenge? Selden Whitcomb 
wrote his 1906 guide to the novel in an intellectual climate which recognised 
language as a rhetorical medium, but a medium which individuals could 
freely use to refer to and express the things of the world, human states 
of mind, emotions and so forth. This made language an intelligible fact of 
nature. Whitcomb accepted that writers would struggle with the imperfec 
tions of language in an effort to express their 'ideas and ideals'; but in the end 
they 'may take delight in calm obedience to the will of nature, as it appears 
in ... language' (p. 248). 

In a radical departure, Saussure's linguistics argued that language does 
not work on the basis of nature, reference and expression. Instead, it works 
on the basis of convention, signification and difference. Saussure no longer 
started with a conception of the word, conceiving instead of the 'sign', 
arguing that signs generate meaning not because they refer to things; 
on the contrary, they have a completely arbitrary relationship to things. 
Signs generate meaning because of conventionally maintained relations of 
difference from one another within a self-contained structure ('la langue', 
or language). 10 This powerful, self-contained structure is something that 
humans are born into: language speaks, or writes, its users, rather than the 
other way round. In practice, this structural and semiotic theory of language 
breaks the natural 'fit' between language and the world which was always a 
possibility for pre/structuralist novel criticism. For the novel and narrative, 
this break means that its mimetic effects have to be seen as being derived from 
signification rather than reference and expression. If the novel imitates at all 
then it imitates the conventions of signification which structure language as 
a practice. Instead of imitating the things of the world, the novel imitates 
language structures. 

These arguments have been extended by certain present/day theories of 
'discourse'. One of the difficulties with Saussure's structuralist theory of 
language is that 'la langue' is assumed to be homogeneous and smoothly self- 
regulating. This is where theories of 'discourse' take Saussure's insights in 

directions which theorise language as a field fractured by complex social and 
historical conflicts." Poststructuralist discourse theorists argue that 'la 
langue' is really an array of discursive practices, or specific domains of 
speaking and writing, which authorise and regulate social life and power 
relations. 

Poststructuralist critics have started to reread the novel in history in the 
light of discourse theory. Nancy Armstrong has argued that manners and 
morals of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were institutionalised in 
the discourse of domesticity, which became the object of Richardson's novel 
Pamela (see section 2.14). Discursive practices also authorise and regulate 
recognisably institutionalised knowledges, such as religion, philosophy, the 
law, medicine and science. These can be equally important to the novel: the 
authority of the discourse of scientific 'biology', which emerged only in the 
nineteenth century, is used decisively in H. G. Wells's novel Ann Veronica 
(1909) (see section 4.8). Over time the status, internal composition and 
relations between discourses change. Nancy Armstrong's reading of Pamela 
argues that its discourses of domesticity and sexual desire acquired con/ 
siderable authority and power in the middle of the eighteenth century. By 
the time of H. G. Wells's novel, domesticity could no longer be assigned 
such authority (Wells's heroine has to escape its stifling suburban mani/ 
festation). In Wells's novel biology is the master discourse which assumes 
authority over the messy conflict waged between other competing social 
and political discourses, which the narrative dramatises through character 
types. 

Discourses 'make' characters in novels and in life: they do this by marking 
out particular positions — so/called subject positions — from which indi' 
vidual subjects and collective interests can fashion identities. Accordingly, 
discourses construct evaluations of individual identity based on the social 
categories of masculinity and femininity (gender), class and social rank, and 
race and ethnicity. This is a particularly important point for the new literary/ 
historical rationale in constructing links between novels, biographies and 
autobiographies. These emerged as important genres for absorbing and trans/ 
forming discourses of subjectivity to articulate what Dipesh Chakrabarty 
has described as 'the public and private rituals of modern individualism'. 12 
I noted in my brief discussion of Saussure that one of the implications of his 
theory of language is that language 'makes' the self. 'Literature' can be 
viewed as a discourse which can be drawn upon in these rituals of self- 
making. If we take 'literature' to be present in specific, prestigious uses of 

Whitcomb's book was aimed at the first generation of students who were 
beginning to study the novel as 'literature'. This brings us to another sense 
of the novel's relationship to 'culture' which is implicit in Whitcomb's 
project: 'culture' as the learned study of selected and valued objects which 
could promote the moral and intellectual growth of an individual reader in 
'self-culture'. As I shall demonstrate in Chapters 2 and 3, novels such as 
Richardson's Pamela and Bronte's Jane Eyre told powerful stories about selves 
which were expected to enrich their readers morally. And yet, a certain 
defensiveness in Whitcomb's tone indicates the difficulty he faced when 
installing the novel in general as a valued and self-improving object of study: 
'it is no longer deemed necessary to apologise for fiction itself, but a detailed 
study of its form is still quite generally proposed in apologetic tones' (p. vii). 
Whitcomb's comment recognises the novel's quasi'disreputable past during 
which it had, in some incarnations, been vilified as trivial or downright 
harmful to processes of 'self-culture'. 

Let us look at what was at stake in two examples of ways in which the 
novel was seen to be harmful to 'self-culture'. Because novels are classified 
as fictions or made/up stories, and because certain Protestant theologies are 
distrustful of imitations and images, novels were anathema to some religious 
sects, especially during the nineteenth century. However, the same sects still 
subscribed to the benefits of 'self-culture' through approved forms of read/ 
ing. If novels were rejected, biographies and autobiographies — non/fictional 
narratives about 'real', exemplary individual lives — were considered to 
be suitable. 13 Another example of the novel's perceived harmfulness was 
articulated supposedly in defence of women readers of novels in the nine/ 
teenth century, whose 'weaker minds' were deemed, in the gendered dis' 
courses of biological and psychological science, to be more susceptible to 
damage under the influence of sensationally shocking narratives. 14 The 
point to note about these examples of attempts to regulate the relations 
between the novel and 'self-culture' is that they judge the novel through, 
on the one hand, discourses of theology and its distinctions between 

divine truth and devious fiction; and, on the other, gendered science and 
psychology. 

This brings us to the least immediately obvious, yet most important sense 
of the relation of the novel and prose narrative to 'culture'. This defines 
'culture' as a field, actualised in print and book production, in which 
meanings are made and exchanged, and discourses clash and collide over 
contests between, for instance, the real and the fictional, high and low taste, 
convention and originality, and masculine and feminine identities. Novels 
can be open to challenge in this field by authoritative discourses which 
dismiss them as trivial or harmful. But novels can selectively absorb those 
authoritative discourses into their intertexts, as we shall see in Jane Eyre's use 
of psychological discourse (section 3.5). Novels can also, as we shall see in 
sections 4.4—5, aspire to the higher echelons of the field by refining 
themselves into serious mediators of a refined artistic perspective on life. Or, 
indeed, novels can adopt a playful and parodic orientation towards cultural 
discourses (Chapter 5). Thus novels in England have been, since the 
eighteenth century at least, important participants in the field of culture, 
absorbing discourses into their narrative intertexts which rehearse and seek 
to resolve conflicts over contested values and meanings. 

This way of seeing the novel needs to be blended with the very factors that 
grant novels their privileged position in the cultural field, which is based on 
the subjective investments and involvements that they invite of their readers. 
Novels engagingly dramatise conflicts over truth and value through stories 
about character formation and relationships in recognisable social settings, 
where the everyday materials of manners, morals, customs and beliefs seem 
to be like life itself. In other words, readers can generally seek the pleasurable 
surface presence of a mimetic 'picture of social culture', to use Whitcomb's 
words again. But this is an effect, an artfully constructed alibi to deflect from 
the contest of discourses that is being waged. 

But the contest is never deflected completely. Certain narratives, for 
instance those I shall address in Chapter 5, insist that the reader recognises 
them for what they are: narrative discourses. And even in more transparent 
reading experiences, readers are often invited to negotiate complex linguistic 
or indeed 'literary' effects. Whitcomb noted that 'the interpretation of 
culture by the novelist often has a touch of irony, for the imagination sees 
manners in their relative values' (p. 138). Whitcomb recognised, import/ 
antly, that novelists can be active and critical interpreters of that which they 
represent, as is evident in the degree of ironic distance perceptible in even 

the clearest picture of manners or morals. If we remember that discourse 
signifies in order to produce the effect of mimesis, it follows that irony in the 
novel is produced by linguistic means; that is to say, the imitation and ironic 
framing or 'quoting' of voices and forms of discourse. This is a point that I 
shall demonstrate in section 2.6, when I analyse the narrative techniques of 
free indirect speech in Jane Austen's Emma; and section 4.2, where I analyse 
'language images' in Charles Dickens's Bleak House. Both techniques invite 
complex literary responses, but the general point to emphasise is that these 
are shaped by the discursive contexts, and conflicts of culture, in which the 
novels participate. 

For Selden Whitcomb the development of the novel in history coincided 
with periods of conflict: 'the novel has flourished most in periods of 
complex social life, when antagonistic currents of thought were meeting, 
giving rise to social, ethical and aesthetic problems' (p. 160). To that extent 
Whitcomb's view of the novel is close to that which has been formulated by 
an important twentieth/century Russian theorist and historian of the novel, 
M. M. Bakhtin. Bakhtin's view of the history of the novel will be discussed 
in more detail in section 5.6. Broadly, he conceived the novel as a dynamic 
form in continuous and active dialogue with the forms of language and 
discourse which struggled against one another at particular moments of 
social and cultural history." The main difference between Whitcomb and 
Bakhtin, and other present/day critics who have moved broadly in line with 
the new literary/historicism, is this: for Whitcomb the novel was a reflection 
of social change and conflict, whereas for critics in the present the discursive 
intertexts of the novel and prose narrative are seen as active participants in 
shaping and negotiating these cultural conflicts — sources of power in their 
own right. 

Jane Austen's Emma announced itself to readers in the following terms 
when it was published in 1816: EMMA: / A NOVEL / IN 
THREE VOLUMES / BY THE AUTHOR OF 'PRIDE AND 
PREJUDICE'. 1 This suggests a number of 'givens': that 'the novel' was an 
identifiable cultural institution, recognised by 'novel' readers; that certain 
authors were 'novelists' to whom readers would return because of prior 
performances (Jane Austen is not named, instead there is a reference to the 
earlier Pride and Prejudice); that readers would find a continuous narrative 
in the three separate volumes comprising the work. Two years before in a 
postscript to his novel Waverley (1814, published anonymously), Sir Walter 
Scott was able to write confidently of a 'contract' between reader and 
novelist. 2 If all of this points to the existence of a stable and knowing 
relationship between novelists and readers in the first decades of the 
nineteenth century, why is it that Percy Lubbock, over one hundred years 
later in 1921, should complain in an influential book entitled The Craft of 
Fiction of 'the want of a received nomenclature', or vocabulary, for the 
purpose of 'criticising the craft of fiction'? 3 

Lubbock's sense of a lack can be explained by the fact that he was 
'inventing' a formalist novel criticism. Novel reading might be founded on 
an implicit contract, but criticism had to be explicit and precise. Lubbock's 
own preference for a critical vocabulary, centred on the question of narrative 
point of view, was derived rather selectively from his mentor Henry James, 
a late nineteenth/century novelist and critic whose legacy will be examined 
in sections 4.5—7. Lubbock argued that the novel, in order to be considered 
as good art, ought to be unified around a consistent narrative point of view 
(a concept which will be explored in section 2.5 below). 